1

PACE: Probabilistic Adaptive Contention Control
for Non-Primary Channel Access in IEEE 802.11bn
Taewon Song and Yeunwoong Kyung

Abstract—While an overlapping basic service set (OBSS) transmission occupies the primary channel, adjacent non-primary
channels sit idle, and IEEE 802.11bn introduces non-primary
channel access (NPCA) to exploit these intervals. The standard
contention mechanism is ill-suited to NPCA’s bounded windows,
however, as its collision-triggered backoff growth synchronizes
stations into repeated collisions or pushes their counters beyond
the remaining opportunity. We propose PACE, a probabilistic
adaptive contention control scheme that lets stations track the
time-varying fair-share transmission probability of the depleting
window without central coordination, combining a deadlinescaled initialization, a distributed multiplicative feedback rule
with solo-copy consensus, and a proactive self-exclusion of stations whose frame exceeds the remaining window. We evaluate
PACE under IEEE 802.11 timing on a non-primary channel
shared with native stations, against the standard-compliant
baseline and a genie-aided fair-share reference. Across 5–50
visiting stations, PACE keeps the total useful airtime within
3% of the fair-share reference under request-to-send/clear-tosend (RTS/CTS)-protected access, up to 61% above the standard
procedure and up to 4.1× under basic access, while holding the
visitors’ airtime at or below their population-proportional share.
These results establish probabilistic, deadline-aware contention
as a design reference for non-primary channel access in nextgeneration Wi-Fi.
Index Terms—Non-Primary Channel Access, IEEE 802.11bn,
Probabilistic Access Control, OBSS, Adaptive Contention, Wi-Fi

I. I NTRODUCTION
Spectrum efficiency in next-generation Wi-Fi networks depends critically on how effectively stations (STAs) exploit
available channel time. In dense deployments, overlapping
basic service sets (OBSSs) routinely occupy the primary channel while adjacent channels remain idle, creating a persistent
underutilization problem. Hence, IEEE 802.11bn addresses
this gap by introducing non-primary channel access (NPCA),
which allows STAs to transmit opportunistically on nonprimary channels during ongoing OBSS intervals [1], [2].
NPCA, however, presents a contention challenge distinct
from conventional channel access. Each opportunity lasts only
T. Song is with the Division of Electronics and Electrical Engineering,
College of Engineering, Dongguk University, 30, Pildong-ro 1-gil, Jung-gu,
Seoul 04620, Republic of Korea (e-mail: twsong@dongguk.edu) and Y. Kyung
is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Seoul National University
of Science and Technology, Korea. (e-mail: ywkyung@seoultech.ac.kr), Corresponding author: Y. Kyung
This work was supported in part by the National Research Foundation of
Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. RS-202625481311), in part by Institute of Information & Communications Technology
Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT)
(No. RS-2026-25523610), and in part by the Dongguk University Research
Fund of 2026.

as long as the ongoing OBSS transmission, so competing STAs
must resolve their access within a finite, depleting window.
To govern this access, the IEEE 802.11bn draft has STAs on
the non-primary channel reuse the same binary exponential
backoff (BEB) mechanism that the distributed coordination
function (DCF) employs on the primary channel [1], yet
BEB was designed for open-ended contention. On the primary
channel, doubling the backoff window after each collision
harmlessly spreads out retransmissions; within a bounded
NPCA window the same growth turns harmful, as the inflated
backoff frequently exceeds the time remaining. STAs whose
counters overshoot the deadline are silenced for the rest of the
interval, leaving the channel idle even when they still have data
to send. Heterogeneous frame lengths compound the problem,
since the draft leaves unspecified what a STA should do when
its frame no longer fits the remaining window.
Existing work on NPCA has focused on characterizing
aggregate throughput and delay under the standard switching
rule, taking BEB within the non-primary channel as given [2]–
[4]. The contention dynamics within the finite NPCA window,
and the mismatch between BEB’s infinite-horizon design and
the window’s bounded duration, have not been addressed.
Adaptive probabilistic schemes, in turn, are built for infinitehorizon operation and converge to a static equilibrium, so they
too fail to track the optimal access probability as the window
shrinks and the set of viable STAs changes.
In this paper, we propose PACE, a probabilistic adaptive
contention control scheme for NPCA that enables STAs
to collectively track the time-varying fair-share transmission
probability of each moment within the window, without
central coordination or explicit inter-STA signaling. PACE
adapts the multiplicative-increase and multiplicative-decrease
(MIMD) feedback rule inspired by the probabilistic neighbor
discovery (PND) algorithm [5] to the finite-window NPCA
context. STAs copy the successful sender’s probability on solo
receptions, reduce on collision, and increase on idle slots,
causing distributed dynamics to track the fair-share policy.
PACE further adds a physical protocol data unit (PPDU)-aware
self-exclusion rule that silences STAs whose frame length
exceeds the remaining window, eliminating a class of futile
contention attempts that BEB would otherwise sustain.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows.
• We characterize the fair-share transmission probability for
finite-window NPCA, showing that it must continuously
track the remaining window duration and the number of
still-viable competing STAs, a deadline-driven, rising target that neither BEB nor existing infinite-horizon adaptive
schemes follow.

2

We propose PACE, a fully distributed algorithm that
addresses both requirements simultaneously. A deadlinescaled initialization and MIMD feedback drive the transmission probability toward the time-varying target without inter-STA signaling or knowledge of the total STA
count.
• Through simulation in IEEE 802.11 standard timing on a
channel shared with native DCF stations, we demonstrate
that PACE keeps the total useful airtime within 3%
of a genie-aided fair-share reference under request-tosend/clear-to-send (RTS/CTS)-protected access and up
to 4.1× above the standard-compliant baseline under
basic access, holds the visitors’ airtime at or below their
population-proportional share, and attains a per-attempt
success ratio close to three times the baseline’s, matching
the fair-share reference; an ablation study further shows
that both the deadline-scaled initialization and the selfexclusion rule are necessary for these gains.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews related work on NPCA and adaptive medium
access control (MAC) protocols. Section III presents the system model. Section IV describes the PACE algorithm and its
theoretical foundation. Section V presents simulation results,
and Section VI concludes the paper.
•

Backbone
Networks

Target BSS

Neighboring BSS

Target BSS

Channel #1

Channel #2

BSS Primary

NPCA Primary

Neighboring BSS
Overlapping BSS

BSS Primary
OBSS Tx

Fig. 1: Two-BSS topology and channel assignment.

II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Non-Primary Channel Access in IEEE 802.11bn
IEEE 802.11bn introduces NPCA as a core mechanism
for exploiting idle secondary channels during OBSS transmissions [1], [6]. Wei et al. [2] extended Bianchi’s DCF
model to the multi-channel setting and showed analytically
that NPCA outperforms the non-NPCA mode; a follow-up [4]
added switching overhead and a threshold policy for toggling
NPCA on primary-channel occupancy. Bellalta et al. [3]
modeled a multi-BSS topology as a continuous-time Markov
chain and identified a secondary-channel contention trade-off
that can limit NPCA gains. Lee and Song [7] showed that
PPDU duration affects inter-BSS coexistence nonlinearly, and
Song [8] applied deep reinforcement learning to the channelactivation decision.
Across these studies, however, efforts to improve NPCA
performance target the decision of when to switch to the
non-primary channel, through occupancy-based threshold policies [4] or learned activation rules [8], while the contention
mechanism exercised within the window is left fixed at BEB.
How STAs should adapt their access probability as the window
depletes and viable STAs drop out has not been studied.
B. Adaptive Contention Control in Wireless LANs
Bianchi [9] established that BEB operates below the theoretical throughput ceiling, and Cali et al. [10] showed that
p-persistent access can approach this limit distributedly, at
the cost of estimating the active station count from idle-slot
statistics. Later work diversified the mechanisms. BLADE [11]
runs a hybrid increase multiplicative decrease (HIMD) policy
toward a fixed target rate derived from a steady-state model;

Wilhelmi et al. [12] impose a structured transmission order
that requires each STA to identify and track its neighbors; and
learning-based approaches select contention windows through
deep Q-networks at the access point [13] or through fairnessconstrained multi-agent policy optimization trained centrally
on joint observations [14].
Several of these schemes follow a moving operating point
as the population changes, but none represents a deadline; all
assume an open-ended horizon, so their target never depends
on how much time is left, whereas in NPCA the optimal
probability must evolve as the window shrinks and the viable
population changes. The MIMD rule of PND [5] is the closest
mechanism in spirit, but was designed for infinite-horizon
neighbor discovery and accounts for neither bounded duration
nor frame-length viability.
Table I summarizes these distinctions along three axes.
Frame-fit self-exclusion withdraws a STA whose frame no
longer fits the remaining window. A signaling-free scheme
transmits no control information for its own sake, a value
riding in a frame a STA sends anyway not being counted,
and △ marks a scheme that adds no transmission but must
still infer the contending population from the activity of the
others. Time-varying target tracking follows an operating point
that moves with the contending population rather than a static
equilibrium. No prior scheme withdraws an unfittable frame,
and the schemes that do adapt their operating point either
track only the contending population or pay for the adaptation
with a view of that population, whereas PACE meets all three
requirements from purely local observations.

3

TABLE I: Comparison of contention control schemes.
Method
PND [5]
AND [15]
Cali et al. [10]
BLADE [11]
IYT [12]
ACWB-DQN [13]
FC-MAPPO [14]
PACE (proposed)

Mechanism and objective
Multiplicative feedback with solo-copy rule; converge the
transmission probability to the optimum without the contender count
Fixed-probability slotted ALOHA; discover all neighbors in finite
time without coordination
p-persistent access with run-time estimation of the active station
count; approach the theoretical throughput limit in a distributed
manner
Hybrid increase / multiplicative decrease toward a fixed target access
rate; eliminate packet-delivery droughts for real-time Wi-Fi
Neighbor-ordered backoff interval assignment; reduce collision
probability and worst-case latency
Deep Q-network contention window selection centralized at the AP;
maximize throughput under varying network load
Fairness-constrained multi-agent policy optimization; minimize
collisions while ensuring inter-STA fairness
Multiplicative feedback with PPDU-aware self-exclusion;
maximize channel utilization in the finite NPCA window

III. S YSTEM M ODEL
A. Network and Channel Model

Signalingfree
✓

Time-varying
target tracking
✓

×

✓

×

×

△

✓

×

✓

×

×

△

×

×

×

✓

×

×

✓

✓

✓

✓

Without NPCA
Secondary Channel
Primary Channel

Fig. 1 depicts the two-BSS topology and channel assignment
assumed throughout this work. The target BSS, whose NPCA
operation is our focus, comprises an access point (AP) and
a set V = {1, 2, . . . , Nvis } of associated non-AP STAs and
they can be considered as visitors to the neighboring BSS.
The visitors normally contend on their BSS primary channel,
Channel #1 in Fig. 1, which is the main channel used by the
target BSS for its own transmissions.
Channel #1 is also used by an OBSS operating on the
same channel, whose transmissions intermittently render it
busy. In standards prior to IEEE 802.11bn, a STA could
not initiate a transmission whenever its designated primary
channel was busy, even if the secondary channel was idle.
In IEEE 802.11bn, however, the AP can designate a separate
channel as the NPCA primary channel, used by the visitors
during NPCA operation, named as Channel #2 in Fig. 1. We
use the qualifier “BSS” to distinguish the original primary
channel from the NPCA primary channel, consistent with
P802.11bn Draft terminology [1].
The NPCA primary channel is not unused spectrum reserved
for the target BSS. Channel #2 is itself the BSS primary
channel of the neighboring BSS, comprising its own AP and
a set N = {1, 2, . . . , Nnat } of native STAs that contend on it
with standard DCF at all times. The visitors, by contrast, use
Channel #2 only opportunistically, during NPCA visits. Two
classes of contenders therefore coexist on the NPCA primary
channel: the native STAs, which contend there persistently, and
the visitors, whose access is confined to the bounded NPCA
window.
As depicted in Fig. 1, we assume the coverages of the
two BSSs coincide, so that all visitors and native STAs
are mutually within carrier-sensing range and form a single
collision domain on the NPCA primary channel: every visitor
senses, defers to, and competes with every native STA. This
is the configuration in which the visitors’ impact on native
airtime is greatest, so the coexistence results reported here

Frame-fit
self-exclusion
×

: Backoff
Busy
Transmission

Transmission
Transmission

Busy

Radio switching delay,
𝛿!"

With NPCA
NPCA Primary Channel
BSS Primary Channel

Busy
Transmission

Transmission

Transmission

Transmission

Busy

Fig. 2: The medium access process comparison with and
without NPCA.

upper-bound that cost. In general the two coverages may
overlap only partially, in which case a visitor outside the
neighboring BSS coverage would reuse the NPCA primary
channel without contending with the natives at all; this spatialreuse regime only lowers the coexistence cost and is left to
future work.
B. NPCA Operation and Effective Window
Fig. 2 contrasts the medium-access processes with and
without NPCA operation. Under conventional access (top),
prior to IEEE 802.11bn, a STA contends only on the BSS
primary channel.1 It decrements its backoff counter while the
channel is idle and transmits when the counter reaches zero.
If the secondary channel is also sensed idle at this instant, the
STA may bond it with the BSS primary channel and transmit a
wideband PPDU spanning the combined bandwidth (e.g., 40,
80, 160, or 320 MHz). When an OBSS transmission seizes the
BSS primary channel, however, the STA must defer and freeze
its backoff for the entire OBSS busy period, even though the
secondary channel is idle.
Under NPCA access (bottom), a STA no longer wastes the
OBSS busy period. When it detects an OBSS transmission
on the BSS primary channel, it decodes the preamble of that
1 We use the term BSS primary channel to distinguish the original primary
channel from the NPCA primary channel introduced in IEEE 802.11bn. Prior
to 802.11bn, when NPCA was not yet defined, this channel was referred to
simply as the primary channel.

4

transmission and learns its duration in advance,2 rather than
freezing its backoff for the whole period, it switches to the idle
NPCA primary channel and contends and transmits there. On
each such switch the STA saves its backoff state on the BSS
primary channel and initializes a fresh contention window for
the NPCA primary channel, so every NPCA visit begins at the
minimum backoff stage regardless of prior history. The STA
already knows when the OBSS transmission will finish, so it
sets a timer to that instant and switches back when it expires,
restoring the saved state. Spectrum that a conventional STA
leaves idle is thus put to use.
Two constraints shape this access. First, a radio transition
delay δsw is incurred on each switch: the STA becomes
ready on the NPCA primary channel only after the switching
delay, and the NPCA timer is set to expire one switch-back
delay before the OBSS transmission ends so that the STA
is back on the BSS primary channel in time [1]. Second,
the opportunity lasts only until the known end of the OBSS
transmission, whose remaining duration Drem is read from
the preamble. Contention and transmission must therefore fit
within a bounded window of


Drem − 2 δsw
slots,
(1)
Weff =
σ
where σ is the slot time, typically 9 µs in IEEE 802.11compliant systems. Hence, a single NPCA transition admits
NPCA transmissions during Weff slots at most, which we
index by t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , Weff }.
This deadline is the crux of NPCA. Every backoff decision
competes against it. A STA that collides doubles its contention
window as usual, and once the resulting backoff exceeds the
slots left in Weff , it can no longer transmit before the window
closes so it wastes the rest of the opportunity despite having
data to send.
Because the contention window is reset at every NPCA visit,
this penalty recurs each time rather than amortizing across
visits. This mismatch between open-ended backoff and the
finite window is the inefficiency that PACE targets.
C. Slotted Contention Model
We model time on the NPCA primary channel as a sequence
of slots of duration σ. Each visitor maintains a per-slot
transmission probability τi (t) at each time slot t and, when
eligible, transmits in slot t with that probability, in the manner
of slotted ALOHA; we abbreviate it as τi where the slot index
is immaterial. This per-slot access probability is the variable
that the scheme of Section IV controls. The standard baseline
instead runs its backoff countdown unchanged, and enters the
model only through the slot outcomes defined below.
This probabilistic access departs from the current draft,
which reuses the enhanced distributed channel access (EDCA)
backoff on the NPCA primary channel [1]; PACE keeps the
NPCA architecture intact, including the switching triggers, the
2 NPCA relies on preamble detection rather than energy detection. A STA
must decode the inter-BSS PPDU preamble at PHY-RXSTART to both classify
the transmission and derive its remaining duration, from which the NPCA
window is determined. Energy detection alone, which yields no length or
BSS information, is insufficient to trigger an NPCA transition.

timer, and the state save and restore, and replaces only the
contention rule inside the bounded visit.
Following the slot indexing t ∈ {1, . . . , Weff } of Section III-B, we denote by Wrem (t) = Weff − t + 1 the slots
remaining at slot t, counting down toward the deadline. All
STAs are saturated; each STA i always holds a head-of-line
PPDU occupying Li slots and, upon delivery, draws its next
frame and continues contending, so Li always denotes the
current head-of-line frame. Because a visitor’s transmission
must complete before the window closes, visitor i is viable
at slot t only if its frame still fits, i.e. Li ≤ Wrem (t);
otherwise it can no longer succeed within the visit. The
natives face no such deadline, since the window is the visitors’
constraint alone and a native frame that straddles its end
simply completes on the channel, so every native remains a
contender throughout. We write the viable population at slot
t as

V(t) = i ∈ V : Li ≤ Wrem (t) ∪ N ,
(2)
which is non-increasing in t as both the window depletes and
visitor frames become infeasible, but never falls below Nnat .
The viable population defines a natural operating point for
contention. In a slot with |V(t)| viable STAs each attempting
independently with a common probability, a success, meaning
exactly one transmitter, is most likely when that probability is
τ ∗ (t) =

1
,
|V(t)|

(3)

the classical slotted-ALOHA optimum applied to the viable
set. This is the attempt-fair operating point rather than an
airtime optimum, and it is the target the scheme of Section IV
tracks in service of the efficiency and fairness objective of
Section IV-E. Because V(t) is non-increasing, the target rises
toward the deadline, and tracking it without knowing |V(t)| is
what Section IV constructs.
At each slot t, a viable STA i attempts transmission with
probability τi (t). Following the half-duplex assumption, a
transmitting STA cannot sense the channel in the same slot. Let
D(t) denote the set of STAs whose transmissions on the NPCA
primary channel are detected by a given STA in slot t. This set
is defined at the channel level. It counts every STA transmitting
on that channel in the slot, not only the switching visitors but
also any other STA that uses the same channel as its own
primary. The slot outcome is idle when |D(t)| = 0, a success
when |D(t)| = 1, and a collision when |D(t)| ≥ 2. These
three observable events are the only feedback available to a
STA, and they drive the adaptive contention control developed
in Section IV.
The remaining window advances by the time each outcome
occupies the medium. An idle slot consumes one slot, while a
successful slot consumes Lsolo slots and a collision consumes
Lcol slots. The two occupancies depend on the access mode.
1) Basic Access: A successful slot is occupied by the sole
sender’s frame,
Lsolo = Li

if D(t) = {i},

(4)

5

as in standard IEEE 802.11 without collision detection. Since
each STA contends for one head-of-line PPDU at a time, Li
is fixed until that frame is delivered; the slot dependence of
both occupancies enters through the identity of the transmitters
D(t) and their current frames.
2) RTS/CTS-Protected Access: Under RTS/CTS-protected
access the busy-slot accounting changes. A successful exchange is preceded by the handshake and therefore occupies
Lsolo = Li + Lhs

if D(t) = {i},

STA b
STA c

Pr

(5)

i∈D(t)

STA a

OBSS

Pr

Lcol = max Li ,

Transit to NPCA channel after store the retry count,
the contention window, and the backoff counter

BSS Primary Channel

OBSS

Freezing
Freezing

is the handshake overhead, with TRTS , TCTS , and TSIFS being
the RTS, CTS, and short interframe space (SIFS) durations
defined in IEEE 802.11. A collision, by contrast, involves only
RTS frames. The data frames are never sent, and the channel
recovers after the extended interframe space, so a collision
occupies


TRTS + TEIFS
Lcol =
(8)
σ
slots, where TEIFS = TSIFS + TACK + TDIFS is the extended
interframe space with TACK and TDIFS being the acknowledgment (ACK) and distributed interframe space (DIFS) durations
defined in IEEE 802.11. Unlike its basic-access counterpart
of (5), this occupancy is a constant. Under protection the
viability test of (2) must also leave room for the handshake,
i.e. Li is replaced by Li + Lhs ; basic access is the special case
Lhs = 0 with Lcol given by (5).
IV. PACE A LGORITHM
Fig. 3 illustrates contention on the NPCA primary channel
under the slotted model of Section III-C and contrasts the two
schemes studied in this paper. In both, a STA that detects an
OBSS transmission on the BSS primary channel stores its DCF
state, migrates to the NPCA primary channel, and contends
there until the NPCA timer expires, whereupon it restores the
saved state and resumes on the BSS primary channel. Under
the NPCA baseline of Fig. 3a, STAs contend with BEB. A STA
that collides doubles its contention window, so its counter can
outlast the remaining window, and because the countdown is
frozen during every busy period, the surviving counters tend
to expire together and collide again.
Meanwhile, under the proposed PACE scheme of Fig. 3b,
each STA instead adapts its per-slot probability τi from the
idle, success, and collision feedback. The access probability is
raised multiplicatively on idle slots, lowered on collisions, and
replaced by the successful sender’s value on solo receptions. In
addition, a STA proactively withdraws from contention once
its frame can no longer fit within Wrem (t).
Algorithm 1 summarizes PACE as executed independently
by each STA on the NPCA primary channel during a single

Freezing

STA c
Channel is acquired, but STA
cannot transmit since the pending
PPDU length is larger than
remaining NPCA residence time

Reset contention window

(a) NPCA baseline (BEB).

STA c

Pr

STA b

Store the retry count, the contention
window, and the backoff counter
OBSS

Pr

(7)

TXOP

STA b

OBSS

Pr

: Preamble

OBSS

Pr

Lhs =



DIFS
Freezing

TXOP

STA a

STA a

TRTS + TCTS + 2 TSIFS
σ

DIFS

NPCA Primary Channel

BSS Primary Channel



: Preamble

Resume the contention with the stored
variables

(6)

slots, where

Pr

OBSS

Pr

while a collision keeps the medium busy until the longest
colliding frame has ended,

Transmission probability decreases
multiplicatively when STA detects
collided transmission

Resume the contention with the stored
variables
The STAs except transmitting one set
their transmission probability equal to
the corresponding STA’s value

NPCA Primary Channel
TXOP

STA a
STA b

TXOP

STA c

TXOP

slot
time

Transmission probability grows
multiplicatively when the STA
senses that the channel is idle

TXOP

Some STAs may quit the
contention when the remained
contention
opportunity
is
shorter than candidate TXOP

(b) Proposed PACE (probabilistic adaptive contention).

Fig. 3: Medium access on the NPCA primary channel: a STA
that detects an OBSS transmission on the BSS primary channel
migrates and contends within the bounded NPCA window. (a)
the standard NPCA baseline with binary exponential backoff,
and (b) the proposed PACE with probabilistic adaptive contention and PPDU-aware self-exclusion.
NPCA visit. Every STA runs the same rule using only locally
observable feedback, those are, the per-slot outcome and
its own remaining window without central coordination or
knowledge of the contending population.
We adopt the probabilistic approach for two reasons. First,
the per-slot probability τ is the abstraction under which DCF,
PND, and AND are all analyzed [5], [9], [15], placing PACE
on the same analytical footing. Second, a single backoff
draw cannot re-adapt within the handful of slots a visit lasts,
whereas a per-slot probability can be re-steered every slot by
the feedback law of Subsec. IV-D; the ALOHA-style attempt is
the mechanism that makes within-window adaptation possible.
Algorithm 1 runs four phases per visit. (a) a one-time
probability initialization, followed by a per-slot loop of (b)
self-exclusion, (c) channel access, and (d) feedback-based
adaptation. The remainder of this section develops each phase
in turn.
A. Phase (a): Probability Initialization
A visitor that has just switched to the NPCA primary
channel does not know how many other STAs are contending
there. The population-matched choice τ0 = 1/(Nvis +Nnat ),

6

Algorithm 1 PACE at STA i during one NPCA visit
Require: head-of-line PPDU length Li (slots), window Weff , factors
ccoll , cidle > 1, handshake overhead Lhs of Eq. (7) (Lhs = 0
under basic access)
/* Phase (a): Probability Initialization */
1: τi ← 1/Weff ; Wrem ← Weff
2: while Wrem > 0 do
/* Phase (b): PPDU-aware Self-Exclusion */
3:
if Li + Lhs > Wrem then
4:
τi ← 0
5:
end if
/* Phase (c): Probabilistic Channel Access */
6:
draw u ∼ Uniform(0, 1)
7:
if u < τi then
8:
transmit the PPDU, advertising τi (preceded by the
RTS/CTS handshake under protected access)
9:
if solo success then
10:
Wrem ← Wrem − Lsolo ; Li ← next pending PPDU
11:
else
12:
Wrem ← Wrem − Lcol {collided: Eq. (8) under protection, Eq. (5) under basic access}
13:
end if
14:
else
/* Phase (d): Feedback-based Adaptation */
15:
observe the slot outcome |D(t)|
16:
if |D(t)| = 0 then
17:
τi ← min(τi · cidle , 1); Wrem ← Wrem − 1
18:
else if |D(t)| = 1 where D(t) = {j} then
19:
τi ← τj {the solo sender’s advertised probability};
Wrem ← Wrem − Lsolo
20:
else
21:
τi ← τi /ccoll ; Wrem ← Wrem − Lcol
22:
end if
23:
end if
24: end while

which is the value the target τ ∗ of Eq. (3) takes at the start of
a visit in which every contender fits, is therefore unavailable
in practice since the contender count is not observable.
A visitor might estimate its own BSS population from
association state, but the population it actually contends with
also includes the native STAs of the neighboring BSS, which
it has no way to count. The denominator of 1/(Nvis +Nnat ) is
thus doubly hidden, which motivates a surrogate that avoids
counting STAs altogether.
We propose a method where the window length itself
determines the scale. A visit spans Weff slots, and a STA
contends in at most one of them per slot so Weff upper-bounds
the number of attempt opportunities any STA sees in a visit. A
STA attempting with probability τ therefore expects at most
Weff τ attempts before the deadline. Fixing this budget to a
single probe per STA, Weff τ0 = 1 sets the most conservative
self-consistent exploration rate. Low enough to avoid an early
collision storm, yet high enough for each STA to test the
medium about once before the window drains. This yields
τ0 =

1
,
Weff

(9)

with which each visitor starts the visit, τi (1) = τ0 . It depends
only on Weff , which each STA computes locally from the
OBSS PPDU duration, and requires no knowledge of the
contender count.

Since a frame outlasts a single slot, τ0 sits below the
optimum, a bias chosen for two reasons. First, it errs in the
safe direction; an over-conservative τi is raised within a few
slots by the idle-driven increase of Phase (d), whereas an overaggressive start triggers collisions whose wasted slots a finite
window never returns. Second, 1/Weff tracks the regime where
initialization matters most; a tight window Weff ≈ Nvis +Nnat
makes it approximate the optimum 1/(Nvis +Nnat ) outright,
and in a loose one the mild timidity is erased long before the
window drains.
B. Phase (b): PPDU-aware Self-Exclusion
At the start of every slot a STA applies a frame-fit test,
comparing the airtime its own frame needs to the remaining
window Wrem (t). Following the viability condition of Eq. (2),
that airtime is Li under basic access and Li + Lhs under
RTS/CTS protection, since the handshake of Eq. (7) must
also fit before the deadline. If the frame can no longer finish,
the STA sets τi (t) = 0 and stays out; because Wrem (t) only
shrinks, it remains silent for the rest of the visit unless it later
holds a shorter frame. The test involves only the STA’s own
frame and the slot index and, like initialization, requires no
knowledge of the contending population.
Conventional NPCA has no such rule, yet the deadline
binds it all the same; a frame that does not fit the remaining
window is cut off at NPCA-timer expiry even if it wins the
channel [1]. Self-exclusion makes this inevitability explicit and
returns those slots to the STAs that can still finish.
Self-exclusion keeps the optimal target τ ∗ (t) of Eq. (3),
which PACE aims to track, meaningful in a heterogeneous and
finite window. A STA whose frame no longer fits is removed
from the viable set V(t) of Eq. (2), so it neither wastes time
on attempts destined to fail nor inflates the contention seen
by the STAs that can still succeed. This plays the same role
as the collision detection departure of a previously proposed
neighbor discovery algorithm [5], in which a STA leaves the
contention once its advertisement succeeds. Here a STA also
leaves once its frame provably cannot complete, tightening
V(t) toward the set of STAs that genuinely compete for the
remaining slots.
C. Phase (c): Probabilistic Channel Access
A STA that is still viable transmits in slot t with probability
τi (t) and otherwise listens. Because the radio is half-duplex,
a transmitting STA cannot sense the slot it occupies. It learns
from the acknowledgement whether its own frame got through,
which tells it how far the window has advanced and whether to
dequeue the next frame, but it observes none of the three slot
outcomes that drive the adaptation, so it leaves τi untouched
on its own transmissions. Each transmitted PPDU advertises
the sender’s current τi (t) in its header3 , which the listeners use
in Phase (d). This value describes only the sender’s own state
3 A few quantization bits for τ fit in a newly defined A-Control subfield of
i
the HT Control field, which rides unencrypted in the MAC header of a QoS
Data frame; this follows the existing A-Control extension framework, though
it would require an amendment. One placement serves both access modes,
since RTS and CTS carry no HT Control field.

7

and rides in a frame it transmits anyway, in the manner of the
per-frame information IEEE 802.11 headers already carry, so
no control frame is added and no STA ever learns how many
others are contending.
A slot is a success when exactly one viable STA transmits.
Being saturated, the winner draws its next frame and re-enters
the contention with its current τi , which the solo advertisement has just propagated, so V(t) shrinks only through selfexclusion. Slots with no transmission are idle and slots with
two or more are collisions; both outcomes are observed by
every non-transmitting STA and feed Phase (d).

E. Window Scaling of the Adaptation Factors
The rule of Eq. (10) leaves the factors cidle and ccoll open,
and the finite window turns their choice into a trade-off
between two losses that both accumulate before the deadline.
A small factor adapts slowly and spends the visit ramping
toward the operating point, whereas a large one reaches it
quickly but keeps overshooting around it. This subsection
quantifies the balance by treating Phase (d) as a finite-horizon
stochastic approximation. We set the two factors equal, which
keeps every τi on a common multiplicative grid so that the
solo-copy of Eq. (10) exchanges values the listeners can
themselves reach, and the pair then reduces to a single logdomain step size

D. Phase (d): Feedback-based Adaptation
Every STA that listened in slot t updates its probability from
the slot outcome |D(t)| using the MIMD rule inherited from
neighbor discovery as




min cidle τi (t), 1 |D(t)| = 0 (idle),
τi (t′ ) =

τj (t)


τ (t)/c
i
coll

D(t) = {j} (success), (10)

|D(t)| ≥ 2 (collision),

with cidle , ccoll > 1, where t′ denotes the next contention slot
after the outcome of slot t, i.e., t′ = t + 1 after an idle slot
and t′ = t + Lsolo or t′ = t + Lcol after a busy one, and τi is
unchanged while the medium is occupied.
An idle slot signals overestimation of the population and
raises the attempt rate by cidle ; a collision signals the opposite
and divides it by ccoll . On a solo success, every listener copies
the advertised τj , so a single successful slot propagates the
winning operating point to the whole contending set at once,
giving PACE its fast intra-visit consensus.
None of the three updates counts the viable STAs. Instead,
the idle and collision statistics move each τi toward the
operating point implicitly, and solo-copy pulls the population
onto a common value, so the ensemble approximately tracks
the time-varying optimum τ ∗ (t) of Eq. (3) without estimating
the number of contending STAs |V(t)|.
The direction of this adaptation is what separates PACE
from BEB. Because the viable set only shrinks over a visit,
the optimal target τ ∗ (t) = 1/|V(t)| of (3) rises as the deadline
approaches. On the other hand, the BEB moves the opposite
way, that is, a collision doubles the contention window and
halves the attempt rate, so the access probability falls exactly
when it should climb.
Finally, the rule of Eq. (10) needs no modification to operate
alongside the native STAs of Section III-A. Because the slot
outcome D(t) is measured at the channel level, native activity
enters a visitor’s feedback directly. A slot in which two or
more frames overlap is a collision whether the extra transmitter
is a visitor or a native, so a native transmission that clashes
with a visitor lowers that visitor’s τi , and a slot with no
transmission at all, native or visitor, is idle and raises it. The
solo case is the one exception; a native’s frame advertises
no probability, so a listening visitor keeps τi unchanged and
simply observes the busy slot.

ϵ = ln cidle = ln ccoll .

(11)

Let Xk = ln τi at the k-th update opportunity of a visit,
meaning the k-th outcome STA i observes as a listener; slots
in which the STA itself transmits are excluded, since Eq. (10)
does not run there and τi is unchanged (Section IV-C). Under
Eq. (10) the state performs a random walk Xk+1 = Xk +ϵHk ,
where Hk equals +1 on an idle outcome, −1 on a collision,
and 0 otherwise. Splitting each outcome into its conditional
mean and the remainder,
Xk+1 = Xk + ϵ h(Xk ) + ϵ ξk+1 ,
with

h(x) = pI (x) − pC (x),

(12)

where pI (x) and pC (x) are the probabilities that a listener in
state x observes an idle slot or a collision, and ξk+1 = Hk −
h(Xk ) satisfies E[ξk+1 | Xk ] = 0 by construction. Therefore,
Eq. (12) involves no approximation, but it separates the walk
into a deterministic pull and a zero-mean kick.
The pull has a single balance point. Because solo-copy
keeps the population near a common value, we read x as
that common operating point. A larger x then means a busier
channel, so pI falls and pC rises with x, and h crosses zero
exactly once, from above. At the crossing x∗ an idle slot
and a collision are equally likely, and the downward crossing
means the drift restores the state from either side; we write
the restoring rate as κ = −h′ (x∗ ) > 0.
Two clarifications delimit what x∗ is. It is the equilibrium
of the idle and collision feedback, not the fair-share target
itself; we require only that the feedback settles in that target’s
neighborhood, which is what Phase (d) is built to arrange.
And since τ ∗ (t) drifts upward as the viable set drains, the
analysis freezes the target over the stretch it examines, a quasistatic approximation that suffices because the question is how
the step scales with the number of updates, not where the
operating point sits.
Near x∗ the drift linearizes, h(Xk ) ≈ −κYk for the error
Yk = Xk − x∗ ; dropping the quadratic Taylor remainder is the
only approximation made so far, and Eq. (12) becomes
Yk+1 ≈ (1 − κϵ) Yk + ϵ ξk+1 .

(13)

Each update contracts the error by 1 − κϵ and injects a kick
of size ϵξ. At the equilibrium h(x∗ ) = 0, so the noise is the
outcome itself, ξk+1 = Hk , giving ν 2 = Var[Hk | Xk =
x∗ ] = pI (x∗ ) + pC (x∗ ), the fraction of observed outcomes
that move the state at all.

8

A visit is scored by what it accumulates rather than by
where it ends. We make the objective explicit as
2
J = ln T − α ln ρ ,
(14)
where T is the fraction of the window carrying useful airtime, ρ is the visitors’ share of that airtime divided by their
population share Nvis /(Nvis +Nnat ), and α ≥ 0 weights
proportionality against efficiency. The quadratic log penalty
vanishes exactly at the proportional share ρ = 1 and charges
over- and under-service symmetrically, so J scores the design
goal of Section IV-B, an efficient window that neither starves
the visitors nor lets them displace the natives.
The link between the dynamics of Eq. (13) and this objective
is one further assumption, stated openly. Viewed as a function
of the common operating point, J is taken to attain a local
maximum near the feedback equilibrium and to be locally
quadratic there, J(x) ≈ J(x∗ ) − 2q (x − x∗ )2 with curvature
q > 0. Every update spent at error Yk then forfeits about 2q Yk2
of utility, and because the metrics accumulate over the window
rather than being read at the final slot, the loss of a visit with
K update opportunities is
K−1

RK (ϵ) ≈

q X
E[Yk2 ].
2

(15)

k=0

The sum follows from Eq. (13) directly. Writing a = 1 − κϵ
and iterating,
k−1
X
 2
2k 2
2 2
E Yk = a Y0 + ϵ ν
a2j ,

(16)

j=0

whose two terms accumulate differently. The first is the initial
offset Y0 = X0 − x∗ decaying geometrically; its sum over k is
about Y02 /(2κϵ), so a small step pays for its slow ramp at rate
1/ϵ. The second saturates at the stationary variance ϵν 2 /(2κ)
and is then paid on all K updates, so a large step pays for its
jitter at rate Kϵ. Multiplying by q/2,


q Y02
2
RK (ϵ) ≈
+ Kν ϵ ,
(17)
4κ
ϵ
whose terms are the transient and the fluctuation loss; balancing them yields
|Y0 |
ϵ∗ = √ .
(18)
ν K
A short visit offers few corrections, so each must be large;
a long one affords a smaller step that trades ramp speed for
composure around the target.
The number of update opportunities is in turn set by the
window. Every outcome occupies the medium for one idle slot,
Lsolo slots, or Lcol slots, so K ≈ Weff /L̄, where L̄ is the mean
outcome occupancy of the access mode in use. Substituting
into Eq. (18),
√
C
|Y0 | L̄
∗
ϵ = √
, with C =
,
(19)
ν
Weff

√
which prescribes c∗idle = c∗coll = exp C/ Weff . The constant also separates the two access modes. Since basic access
and RTS/CTS protection differ through Lsolo and Lcol , their

p
L̄RTS /L̄basic , so the
constants relate as CRTS /Cbasic ≈
mode whose outcomes hold the channel longer, and hence
grants fewer updates per window, calls for a proportionally
larger step. The argument is summarized as follows, and it
should be read as a scaling law for the local finite-horizon
model above, not as an exact optimality claim for the full
time-varying system.
Proposition 1: Consider the finite-horizon adaptation
Xk+1 = Xk + ϵHk with a locally stable equilibrium x∗ ,
a locally quadratic utility, and bounded outcome noise of
variance ν 2 . If a visit contains K effective update opportunities
and both the transient and the fluctuation loss of Eq. (17) are
accumulated, the loss-minimizing constant step satisfies
ϵ∗K =


|X0 − x∗ |
√
+ o K −1/2 ,
ν K

(20)

hence ϵ∗K = Θ(K −1/2 ). If moreover K = Weff /L̄ + o(Weff ),
√
−1/2 
then ϵ∗ = C/ Weff + o Weff
with C as in Eq. (19).
Two remarks bound the claim. First, Phase (a) sets X0 =
− ln Weff , so the offset |Y0 | = | ln(Weff τ ∗ )| retains a slow
logarithmic dependence on the window, and C behaves as
a constant only over ranges of Weff in which this variation
is small enough to be absorbed. Eq. (19) is therefore an
asymptotic inverse-square-root scaling under the local finitehorizon approximation, not an exact equality. Second, the
scaling presumes the cumulative criterion above; a criterion
that graded only the terminal state would favor a smaller step
of order ln K/K. Within these bounds, Eq. (19) delivers the
same message as the initialization of Phase (a). Both design
knobs of PACE are set from the window alone, the √starting
probability at 1/Weff and the adaptation step at Θ(1/ Weff ),
with faster adaptation in shorter visits.
The scaling is moreover directly implementable, because
Weff is not merely observable but signaled. The OBSS frame
that triggers the switch announces its remaining duration in
its preamble, from which every visitor already computes
Weff
√
through Eq. (1), so a factor of the form exp C/ Weff is a
runtime value obtained at the start of each visit rather than a
constant fixed at deployment.
We call this variant PACE-dynamic, with the single constant
C calibrated once at a reference window to maximize the
objective of Eq. (14) at α = 0.5, and refer to the fixedfactor configuration as PACE-static. The names describe only
how the step size is chosen. Both variants adapt τi on every
observed slot, and both draw on the same local information as
the initialization of Phase (a). Section V-D compares the two
across the window range, where a single fixed factor turns out
to be too small for a short visit and too large for a long one.
V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
We evaluate PACE in the slotted NPCA contention model
under IEEE 802.11 orthogonal frequency division multiplexing
(OFDM) timing. Table II summarizes the parameters. A visit
spans Weff = 420 slots of σ = 9 µs, which corresponds to
3.78 ms, and is contended by Nvis ∈ {5, 10, 20, 50} visitor
STAs running the scheme under test alongside Nnat = 10
native STAs that always run standard DCF. Visitor PPDU

9

Value
{5, 10, 20, 50}
10
9 / 16 / 34 µs
420 slots (3.78 ms)
U [225, 900] µs
450 µs
1/Weff
1.5
10.16
15 / 1023
88 / 106 µs
50 / 20 / 5

durations are drawn uniformly from 225–900 µs and native
frames last 450 µs. PACE follows Algorithm 1 with τ0 =
1/Weff . Unless stated otherwise, PACE denotes PACE-static
with the fixed factors ccoll = cidle = 1.5; PACE-dynamic,

√
which recomputes the factors per visit as c = exp C/ Weff
with C = 10.16 calibrated at the reference window, where
it yields c = 1.64, enters the comparison in Section V-D, in
which the window varies.
We compare PACE against two references. The first
is the standard-compliant NPCA baseline, which contends
with carrier sense multiple access with collision avoidance
(CSMA/CA) under CWmin = 15 and binary exponential backoff (BEB) as Draft 1.2 specifies [1]. Since the draft gates only
the switching decision through the NPCA Minimum Duration
Threshold and leaves the unfittable-frame case unspecified,
we grant the baseline the stronger conformant behavior, a
deferring implementation that withholds frames exceeding the
remaining window through the same locally computable test
as PACE’s Phase (b).
The second is a genie-aided fair-share reference (FS) that
transmits at τ ∗ (t) = 1/|V(t)| with perfect knowledge of the
viable set. FS is not an airtime optimum but the attempt-fair
operating point that PACE is designed to track.
Native STAs keep their standard DCF parameters in every
scheme and contend without any fit restriction; a native
frame that straddles the window end completes, with its inwindow portion credited to the window utilization. Both access
modes of Section III-C are evaluated, basic access charging a
collision the longest colliding frame of Eq. (5), and mandatory
RTS/CTS with the standard-derived costs Lhs = 88 µs and
Lcol = 106 µs. Each data point averages the steady half of
50 consecutive NPCA transitions over 20 sequences and five
seeds. Performance is reported as the total useful airtime of
the channel normalized by Weff , its split between visitors and
natives, and the visitor airtime proportionality index defined
in Section V-B; the two axes are those of the objective J of
Eq. (14).
A. Why PACE: Channel Airtime under Mixed Contention
The design objective of PACE is not visitor throughput per
se, but to keep the shared NPCA channel efficient and fair; the
FS policy embodies that objective, and the evaluation therefore
reports the total useful airtime of the channel.

Total airtime / Weff

Parameter
Visitor STAs Nvis
Native STAs Nnat
Slot time σ / SIFS / DIFS
Effective window Weff
Visitor PPDU duration
Native PPDU duration
Initial probability τ0
MIMD factors ccoll , cidle (PACE-static)
Step-size constant C (PACE-dynamic)
CWmin / CWmax for BEB
RTS/CTS Lhs / Lcol
Transitions / sequences / seeds

0.8

Standard NPCA (CSMA/CA)
PACE-static
Fair share (FS)

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

5

10

20
Number of visitor STAs Nvis

50

(a) Basic access (no RTS/CTS).

0.8
Total airtime / Weff

TABLE II: Simulation parameters. Visitors run the scheme
under test, natives always run standard DCF, and the RTS/CTS
costs assume a 24 Mbps control rate.

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Standard NPCA (CSMA/CA)
PACE-static
Fair share (FS)

5

10

20
Number of visitor STAs Nvis

50

(b) Mandatory RTS/CTS.

Fig. 4: Total useful airtime (visitor and native combined)
versus the number of visitor STAs Nvis for standard-compliant
NPCA (CSMA/CA visitors), PACE-static, and the fair-share
reference (FS), in the mixed native/visitor channel with
Nnat = 10 native DCF stations.

Fig. 4 compares Nvis ∈ {5, . . . , 50} visitor STAs operating
either standard CSMA/CA or PACE exactly as specified in
Algorithm 1, every visit starts cold from τ0 = 1/Weff , sharing
the channel with Nnat = 10 native DCF stations, using
IEEE 802.11 OFDM timing. Under basic access in Fig. 4a,
the channel under standard-compliant visitors degrades monotonically as the visitor population grows. When tens of STAs
draw their backoff from the same fixed CWmin = 15 window,
several counters reach zero in the same slot, and the resulting
collision occupies the channel for the full duration of the
longest colliding frame. Over an unbounded horizon this
would be a transient, but the adjustment BEB needs grows with
the contending population while the milliseconds available for
it stay fixed, so an ever larger fraction of the window is spent
on collisions before BEB has adjusted. The standard procedure
thus degrades not only the visitors’ own throughput but the
total useful airtime of the shared channel, which falls to 0.14
at Nvis = 50.
PACE instead sustains a total airtime of 0.56–0.62 across
the entire range, above FS at every point, and reaches 4.1×
the standard procedure at Nvis = 50. This stability reflects the
intended fair-sharing behavior. At Nvis = 5 the conservative
initialization τ0 = 1/Weff leaves most of the channel to
the natives, and as the visitor population and its offered
load grow, the idle-driven increase raises the visitors’ share
monotonically, while self-exclusion releases slots that can no

Visitor airtime proportionality

10

Standard NPCA (CSMA/CA)
PACE-static
Fair share (FS)

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

5

10

20
Number of visitor STAs Nvis

50

Fig.
5:
Visitor  airtime
proportionality
ρ
=

visitor airtime share / Nvis /(Nvis + Nnat ) versus the
number of visitor STAs Nvis , in the same setting as Fig. 4.
ρ = 1 is the proportional-fair reference; ρ > 1 means the
visitors occupy more than their population share. Basic
access; the RTS/CTS values are quoted in the text.

longer carry a full frame. PACE exceeds FS in total airtime
under this access mode because FS enforces the per-STA fair
attempt rate at the cost of collisions that basic access charges at
full frame length, whereas PACE’s gradual probability increase
avoids them.
Under RTS/CTS-protected access, shown in Fig. 4b, a
collision costs the constant Lcol of Eq. (8), which is 106 µs,
instead of a full frame, at the price of the handshake overhead
Lhs of 88 µs on every success. Since a collision now occupies
the channel only briefly, the fair-share policy is also airtimeefficient, and PACE tracks it within 3% over the whole range,
holding 0.71–0.72, while the channel under standard visitors
declines from 0.70 to 0.44. The handshake bounds the duration
of a collision, but it mitigates neither the frozen-backoff idling
nor the synchronized collisions, so PACE retains 61% more
channel airtime at Nvis = 50. Inside a finite NPCA window
shared with natives, probabilistic deadline-aware access keeps
the channel near the efficient and fair operating point, whereas
the standard backoff loses the same airtime to idle slots and
collisions.
B. Fairness between Natives and Visitors
Total airtime alone does not reveal who receives it. Fig. 5
reports the proportionality index ρ of Eq. (14) in the identical
setting as Fig. 4; ρ = 1 is proportional fairness, and ρ > 1
means the visitors occupy the channel beyond their share.
FS itself starts at ρ = 1.6 for Nvis = 5 and falls to about
0.95 at Nvis = 50; even a per-STA fair attempt rate overserves the visitors at low demand, because the natives’ DCF
decrements its backoff only in idle slots and attempts less
often inside a busy window. The FS curve therefore marks the
practically fair operating line.
Against this reference the two schemes separate clearly.
The standard-compliant visitors hold ρ ≈ 0.9–1.0, but this
is a proportional share of a channel whose total airtime their
collisions have already reduced at large Nvis . PACE operates
below unity throughout, holding ρ at 0.55–0.61 under basic
access and 0.65–0.73 under RTS/CTS, so the visitors settle

at roughly two thirds of their proportional share regardless of
their population.
The visitors are guests on the neighboring BSS’s primary
channel, so an NPCA scheme should exploit idle capacity
without displacing native traffic; PACE attains the highest total
airtime in Fig. 4 while leaving the natives’ share intact, its gain
coming from slots that contention had been wasting.
C. Weighting Efficiency against Proportionality
The two preceding views combine on one axis in Fig. 6,
which evaluates the objective of Eq. (14) across the visitor
sweep for three settings of the weight α, no single value being
canonical. At α = 0 the objective reduces to log airtime
and PACE sits at or above FS at every population under
basic access, and within 0.02 of it under RTS/CTS. Raising
α rewards proximity to the proportional line, which is FS’s
defining property. Once proportionality dominates the score,
FS is bound to lead, since it assigns every viable STA the
identical optimal probability by construction; at α = 1 it
moves ahead of PACE from Nvis = 10 onward, yet by at
most 0.26, and PACE stays within about 0.1 of FS at the
calibration weight α = 0.5. The reorderings are confined
to light load under heavy weights. At α = 1 the standard
baseline scores best of the three up to Nvis = 10; a lightly
loaded channel loses little airtime to its collisions and its
share sits near proportional, whereas FS structurally overserves (ρ ≈ 1.6) and PACE under-serves. From Nvis = 20
onward, where contention actually stresses the window, no
weight changes the ranking. PACE and FS remain close
while the standard baseline falls behind, by 0.3 to 1.4 at
Nvis = 50, its collapse in T dominating any proportionality
credit. The calibration weight α = 0.5 of Section IV-E thus
sits in the middle of the range in which the comparison is
insensitive to the weight. What the small FS margin buys
should also be priced. FS transmits at τ ∗ (t) with per-slot
genie knowledge of the viable set, which presupposes both
populations and every contender’s frame fit, and enforcing its
uniform probability would take a central notification to every
STA entering the NPCA transition; PACE reaches these scores
from local feedback alone, knowing neither Nvis nor Nnat and
notified by no one. Near-parity with the genie at every weight
is therefore the substantive result of the figure.
D. Impact of Visiting Duration
The window an NPCA visit receives is not a design choice
but an environmental one. It is the remaining duration of
the OBSS transmission that opened the opportunity, and it
varies from sub-millisecond frames to transmission opportunity (TXOP)-scale bursts. Fig. 7 therefore sweeps the visiting duration from 0.9 to 15.1 ms, which corresponds to
1.6 to 27 mean visitor frames, at Nvis = 20 visitors and
Nnat = 10 natives. This sweep is where the window scaling
of Section IV-E faces its test, so both variants appear, PACEdynamic recomputing its factor per visit from 2.76 at the
shortest window down to 1.28 at the longest.
Under basic access, shown in Fig. 7a, the standard visitors hold the channel at 0.26–0.37; however long the visit,

11

= 0.0

J = lnT

(ln )2

0.5

= 0.5

1.0
1.5
2.0

Standard NPCA
PACE-static
FS (fair share)

5

10
20
visitor STAs Nvis

50

= 1.0

1.0

1.0

1.5

1.5

2.0

5

10
20
visitor STAs Nvis

50

2.0

5

10
20
visitor STAs Nvis

50

0.4

Standard NPCA (CSMA/CA)
PACE-static
PACE-dynamic
Fair share (FS)

0.3
0.9 1.8 3.8 7.6 15.1
Visiting duration (ms)
(a) Airtime, basic access.

1.2

1.2

0.70

1.0

1.0

0.65
0.60
0.9 1.8 3.8 7.6 15.1
Visiting duration (ms)
(b) Airtime, RTS/CTS.

Proportionality

0.5

0.75
Proportionality

0.6

Total airtime / Weff

Total airtime / Weff

Fig. 6: The combined objective of Eq. (14) versus the number of visitor STAs, in the setting of Fig. 4, for proportionality
weights α ∈ {0, 0.5, 1}, under basic access; RTS/CTS behaves analogously and its values are quoted in the text.

0.8
0.6
0.4

0.8
0.6
0.4

0.9 1.8 3.8 7.6 15.1
Visiting duration (ms)

0.9 1.8 3.8 7.6 15.1
Visiting duration (ms)

(c) Proportionality, basic access.

(d) Proportionality, RTS/CTS.

Fig. 7: Impact of the visiting duration (Weff of 100–1680 slots, 0.9–15.1 ms) for the standard procedure, PACE-static, PACEdynamic, and FS, with Nvis = 20 visitor STAs and Nnat = 10 natives; all other parameters as in Table II. Panels (a) and
(b) report the total useful airtime, panels (c) and (d) the visitor airtime proportionality ρ, with the dashed line marking the
proportional share ρ = 1; the legend of (a) applies to all panels.

CWmin = 15 stays mismatched to the 30-station contention,
and the synchronized collision cascades consume a roughly
constant fraction of whatever window is available. Both PACE
variants deliver 1.5× to 2.1× the standard procedure, but they
part at the ends of the sweep. PACE-static declines from 0.61
at 0.9 ms to 0.50 at 15.1 ms and slips below the FS line at
the longest visits (0.50 against 0.53), since a factor calibrated
at the reference window keeps raising the probability past
the fair-share target once the visit lasts long enough for the
overshoot to accumulate. PACE-dynamic holds 0.55–0.57 and
stays above FS at every duration.
Figs. 7c and 7d show what these totals cost in fairness.
PACE-static spans ρ of 0.37–0.93 under basic access and 0.36–
1.07 under RTS/CTS; the same fixed factor leaves the visitors
near a third of their share in a 0.9-ms visit and pushes them
past the proportional line in the longest protected ones, and
its higher short-window total in Fig. 7a is earned by underserving its own visitors. PACE-dynamic compresses the swing
to 0.49–0.78 and 0.51–0.92 and stays below proportionality
throughout. A single coefficient thus errs in opposite directions at the two ends of the range, exactly the transient and
fluctuation losses of Section IV-E, and the inverse-square-root
rule corrects both without additional signaling.
Under mandatory RTS/CTS, shown in Fig. 7b, the airtime
differences narrow because the handshake caps the collision
cost. The standard visitors stay 8–18% below PACE-static
throughout, at 0.59–0.66, and the margin does not close as
the window grows, since the losses caused by the backoff

recur under saturation, where every completed exchange reenters contention with a reset contention window. The two
PACE variants track FS closely and nearly coincide in total
airtime, with the long-window edge going to PACE-dynamic
(0.73 against 0.72, FS at 0.75), so under this access mode
the value of the window scaling lies less in airtime than
in Fig. 7d, where PACE-dynamic keeps the visitors below
the proportional line that the fixed factor crosses. At short
durations both variants leave the visitors a smaller share
than the standard visitors do, but the slots PACE declines to
contest carry native traffic, keeping the total above the standard
procedure at every duration.
E. Tracking the Time-Varying Fair-Share Target
The aggregate results above follow from the within-visit
transmission behavior of each scheme, which Fig. 8 reports.
Since the standard visitor holds no per-slot probability, we
plot for every scheme the measured fraction of viable visitors
transmitting in each slot, against the analytic FS target. The
target τ ∗ (t) stays near 1/(Nvis +Nnat ) = 1/30 for most of the
visit and then rises steeply in the final slots, as PPDU-aware
self-exclusion drains the viable set.
The standard-compliant visitor enters at 1/(CWmin +1) =
1/16, roughly twice the target, and its measured rate then
remains near the target even though the scheme does not
estimate it. The aggregate rate, however, conceals the failure
mechanism. The countdown is deterministic and freezes during
every busy period, so multiple backoff counters expire together

Per-slot transmission rate

12

TABLE III: Per-Attempt Outcome of Visitor Transmissions
(setting of Fig. 8, steady state)

Standard NPCA
PACE-static
PACE-dynamic
FS target ( * = 1/| (t)|)

10 1

Access
basic

10 2

RTS/CTS

0.0

0.5

1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
Elapsed time in the visit (ms)

3.5

Fig. 8: Within-visit transmission dynamics in the reference
setting of Fig. 4 (Nvis = 20, Nnat = 10, Weff = 420 slots,
3.78 ms), under basic access. The analytic FS target τ ∗ (t) =
1/|V(t)| and the measured per-slot transmission rate of viable
visitors under PACE-static, PACE-dynamic, and the standard
procedure, averaged over 500 visits.

once the medium becomes idle, and attempts at the same
average rate collide far more often than independent ones,
84–86% of standard-visitor transmissions collide, against 59–
60% for FS at a comparable rate (Table III). The aggregate
rate is moreover sustained by the few STAs that happen to
draw short backoffs, so the airtime distribution across visitors
grows increasingly uneven.
PACE requires neither knowledge of the target nor favorable
backoff draws. It enters at τ0 = 1/Weff , deliberately below
the target, and the idle-driven multiplicative increase together
with solo-copy propagation raises the measured rate toward the
target from below over the course of the visit; being genuinely
probabilistic, its attempts stay uncorrelated, and they collide at
essentially the rate of the FS reference (Table III). Approaching the target from below is the safe direction established in
Section IV-A. The same qualitative picture holds in both access
modes; under RTS/CTS the convergence is tighter because
each corrective feedback event costs at most the constant Lcol
rather than a full frame.
Fig. 8 is drawn at the reference window, where the factor
PACE-dynamic computes, 1.64, differs little from the fixed
1.5 and the two variants trace nearly the same path. The
distinction appears away from the reference window, which
Fig. 9 redraws at a short and a long visit. In a 1.8-ms visit
the fixed factor never lifts the rate to the target before the
window closes, which is the transient loss of Section IV-E
made visible, whereas the per-visit factor of 2.05 reaches the
target with most of the visit still ahead. In a 15.1-ms visit
the same fixed factor crosses the target partway through and
keeps the rate above it for the remainder, the accumulated
fluctuation loss, while the factor of 1.28 settles onto the target
and stays there. The two failure modes are symmetric, and
correcting them at the trajectory level is what produces the
airtime crossing and the compressed fairness swing of Fig. 7.
Table III classifies every visitor transmission attempt in the
setting of Fig. 8 and summarizes the contention efficiency of
each scheme. Only 14–16% of the standard visitors’ transmission attempts succeed; the rest are synchronized collisions, so
the standard procedure transmits six to seven times to deliver

Scheme
Standard
PACE-static
PACE-dynamic
FS
Standard
PACE-static
PACE-dynamic
FS

Succ.
16%
44%
40%
40%
14%
40%
35%
41%

Coll.
84%
56%
60%
60%
86%
60%
65%
59%

Att./frame
6.5
2.3
2.5
2.5
7.3
2.5
2.8
2.4

a single frame. PACE completes 40–44% of its attempts and
delivers a frame in about two and a half transmissions, which
is essentially the per-attempt outcome of FS itself; PACEdynamic, whose per-visit factor at this window is the slightly
more aggressive 1.64, sits a few points lower at 35–40% while
delivering the same airtime. A high success ratio alone could
be achieved by transmitting rarely, so the result is meaningful
only alongside Fig. 4; PACE attains the highest total airtime
of the three while spending about as many transmissions per
delivered frame as FS. The scheme does not beat the fair
operating point, it reaches it without being told where it is.
F. Ablation Study
PACE adds two mechanisms to the MIMD adaptation rule,
the one-probe initialization τ0 = 1/Weff of Phase (a) and the
PPDU-aware self-exclusion of Phase (b). Fig. 10 removes each
in turn in the setting of Fig. 4. The initialization determines
the behavior at the beginning of the visit and self-exclusion
determines the behavior at its end. The third design choice, the
adaptation step of Section IV-E, distinguishes itself only when
the window varies, so its ablation is the static-to-dynamic
comparison of Section V-D; at the reference window of this
experiment the two variants nearly coincide, and the runs here
use PACE-static.
Replacing the initialization with the knowledge-free choice
τ0 ∼ U(0, 1), a natural prior when no population estimate
is available, reduces the total airtime under basic access to
0.17–0.03, below even the standard baseline at every population. The visit begins with a large number of simultaneous
transmissions, each collision is charged the longest colliding
frame, and the multiplicative decrease is too slow to bring τ
to the operating point of order 10−2 before the window ends.
Under RTS/CTS the totals of 0.42–0.15 also remain below
the standard baseline, because a second failure mechanism
operates in addition to the initial collisions. Visitors drawn
near τ ≈ 1 transmit in almost every slot, so solo successes,
the events that propagate a common operating point through
the copy rule of (10), rarely occur, and the population cannot
converge to a lower τ . The same experiment shows a fairness
deficit as well; at Nvis = 5 under RTS/CTS the visitors occupy
most of the useful airtime while the ten natives obtain almost
none. The conservative initialization is therefore a precondition
for PACE rather than an optimization.
Removing self-exclusion causes a smaller but systematic
loss that grows with the visitor population. Total airtime
decreases by 3–7% across the sweep under both access modes,

Per-slot transmission rate

13

10 1

Weff = 200 slots (1.8 ms): fixed c = 1.5 vs dynamic c = 2.05

10 1

Weff = 1680 slots (15.1 ms): fixed c = 1.5 vs dynamic c = 1.28

10 2
10 2

Standard NPCA
PACE-static
PACE-dynamic
FS target ( * = 1/| (t)|)

10 3
0.00

0.25

0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50
Elapsed time in the visit (ms)

1.75

0

2

4
6
8
10
12
Elapsed time in the visit (ms)

14

Fig. 9: Within-visit transmission dynamics at a short and a long window of the sweep of Fig. 7 (Weff of 200 and 1680 slots,
1.8 and 15.1 ms, Nvis = 20, Nnat = 10), under basic access; the RTS/CTS counterpart shows the same two corrections with
tighter convergence. PACE-static keeps the fixed factor c = 1.5 at both windows, while PACE-dynamic recomputes it per visit,
c = 2.05 at the short window and c = 1.28 at the long one. Measured curves are drawn while more than two visitor frames
on average still fit the remaining window.

Total airtime / Weff

0.8
0.6

PACE-static
No self-exclusion
Naive 0 (0, 1)
Standard NPCA

0.4
0.2
0.0

5

10

20
Number of visitor STAs Nvis

50

Fig. 10: Ablation study in the setting of Fig. 4, under basic
access, with the RTS/CTS values quoted in the text: total useful airtime for full PACE-static, PACE without PPDU-aware
self-exclusion, PACE without the one-probe initialization, and
the standard-compliant baseline.

at Nvis = 50 from 0.556 to 0.520 under basic access and from
0.714 to 0.672 under RTS/CTS. Without Phase (b) a visitor
whose frame no longer fits keeps contending and raises the
collision rate observed by the STAs that can still succeed, and
when it does obtain the channel it starts a transmission that
the NPCA timer terminates, so the final part of the window is
lost. Self-exclusion returns both losses to the remaining viable
STAs. The ablated variant still exceeds the standard baseline
by a wide margin, which indicates that the MIMD adaptation
is the dominant mechanism and that self-exclusion prevents
its gains from degrading near the deadline.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This paper presented PACE, a probabilistic adaptive contention control scheme for non-primary channel access in
IEEE 802.11bn. Inside the bounded NPCA visit the fair
operating point τ ∗ (t) = 1/|V(t)| rises toward the deadline,
whereas BEB lowers its attempt rate after every collision.
PACE replaces the backoff countdown with a per-slot probability governed by the one-probe initialization τ0 = 1/Weff ,
PPDU-aware self-exclusion, and MIMD adaptation with solocopy consensus, and requires neither central coordination nor
knowledge of the contending population.

Simulations under IEEE 802.11 timing with native DCF
stations showed that PACE keeps the total useful airtime within
3% of a genie-aided fair-share reference under RTS/CTSprotected access, exceeds the standard-compliant baseline by
up to 61% there and by up to 4.1× under basic access,
and holds the visitors’ airtime at or below their populationproportional share across 5–50 visiting stations, with each
delivered frame costing about a third of the attempts the
standard procedure requires. Across visit durations of 0.9
to 15.1 ms, the window-scaled PACE-dynamic preserves the
proportionality bound where a fixed factor drifts past it.
An ablation study confirmed that both the deadline-scaled
initialization and the self-exclusion rule are necessary for these
gains.
Future work includes a cost-aware decrease factor, partialoverlap topologies with spatial reuse, TXOP aggregation
within a visit, and warm-starting τ across repeated visits.
R EFERENCES
[1] IEEE,
“IEEE
Standard
for
Information
Technology—Telecommunications and Information Exchange between
Systems—Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Specific
Requirements—Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control
(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications—Amendment:
Enhancements for Ultra High Reliability,” https://mentor.ieee.org/802.
11/dcn/23/11-23-0480-03-0uhr-uhr-proposed-par.pdf, 2023.
[2] D. Wei, L. Cao, L. Zhang, X. Gao, and H. Yin, “Non-Primary Channel
Access in IEEE 802.11 UHR: Comprehensive Analysis and Evaluation,”
in 2024 IEEE 100th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2024-Fall).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–6.
[3] B. Bellalta, F. Wilhelmi, L. Galati-Giordano, and G. Geraci, “Performance Analysis of IEEE 802.11bn Non-Primary Channel Access,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.15774, 2025.
[4] D. Wei, L. Cao, L. Zhang, X. Gao, and H. Yin, “Optimized Non-Primary
Channel Access Design in IEEE 802.11bn,” in GLOBECOM 2024-2024
IEEE Global Communications Conference. IEEE, 2024, pp. 4588–4593.
[5] T. Song, H. Park, and S. Pack, “A Probabilistic Neighbor Discovery
Algorithm in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks,” in 2014 IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC). IEEE, 2014,
pp. 1–6.
[6] L. Galati-Giordano, G. Geraci, M. Carrascosa, and B. Bellalta, “What
Will Wi-Fi 8 Be? A Primer on IEEE 802.11bn Ultra High Reliability,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 126–132, 2024.
[7] J. Lee and T. Song, “Impact of Frame Duration on Cross-Channel
Interference and Coexistence in IEEE 802.11bn NPCA,” in IEEE
International Conference on Communications, 2024.

14

[8] T. Song, “Adaptive Non-Primary Channel Access in IEEE 802.11bn with
Deep Reinforcement Learning,” in 2026 40th International Conference
on Information Networking (ICOIN). IEEE, 2026, pp. 870–873.
[9] G. Bianchi, “Performance Analysis of the IEEE 802.11 Distributed
Coordination Function,” IEEE Journal on selected areas in communications, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 535–547, 2000.
[10] F. Cali, M. Conti, and E. Gregori, “Dynamic Tuning of the IEEE
802.11 Protocol to Achieve a Theoretical Throughput Limit,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on networking, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 785–799, 2002.
[11] F. Guo, Y. Zhou, L. Jiang, C. Miao, Y. Liu, C. Xu, H. Lu, C. W.
Chen, Y. Xie, and H. Liu, “BLADE: Adaptive Wi-Fi Contention Control for Next-Generation Real-Time Communication,” in 23rd USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI
26), 2026, pp. 131–151.
[12] F. Wilhelmi, L. Galati-Giordano, and G. Fontanesi, ““It’s Your Turn”:
A Novel Channel Contention Mechanism for Improving Wi-Fi’s Reliability,” in 2025 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC). IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–6.
[13] Z.-B. Zuo, D.-M. Wang, M.-M. Ma, M.-L. Deng, and C. Wang, “An
Adaptive Contention Window Backoff Scheme Differentiating Network
Conditions Based on Deep Q-Learning Network,” IEEE Transactions on
Network and Service Management, 2025.
[14] J. Pan, J. Wang, Y. Ouyang, W. Cheng, and W. Zhang, “AI-Enhanced
Distributed Channel Access for Collision Avoidance in Future Wi-Fi 8,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23154, 2025.
[15] S. Vasudevan, M. Adler, D. Goeckel, and D. Towsley, “Efficient Algorithms for Neighbor Discovery in Wireless Networks,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 69–83, 2013.

